Hi, bonjour, kwe kwe.
My name is Jacinthe Grondin.
I work as a policy analyst for Indigenous Services Canada.
But who am I?
I am a woman.
I am a daughter.
I am a child.
I am a granddaughter.
I am a spouse.
I am grandmother and I am a friend and a colleague.
I am Algonquin from my mother's side, so I am mixed ancestry.
Algonquin from my mother's side, Lac des Deux Montagnes, but I was raised in a French Canadian environment.
My family history is such as many women were my caretakers, primary caretakers in my life.
There was my natural mother, my adoptive mother, was also Algonquin
and my grandmother, the mother of my father, who was from Beauce.
But, and I will talk about her later.
So, the Algonquin, Indigenous origin of my mother had never been denied at home.
It was clear, it was there.
It was said on a regular basis, especially when my father mentioned
how my grandfather was not eating well like he should be.
But it was okay because it was just a 'savage'.
So, not being, not behaving like my mother's family was the point for us
to be to put forward as a French Canadian family what we needed to succeed.
We were from Beauce from my father's side, and that was very clear.
Even if I was not born in Beauce and never lived in Beauce, and it wasn't like I went to Beauce very little times in my life,
being from Beauce was very strong in my family.
And that was pushing us for success.
We needed to have education.
We needed to learn English, which obviously I learned late in my life,
and we needed to check the box of all the obstacles on our path for success.
My natural mother succeeded very well.
If it was not because of the Indian Act application that made a woman lose her status,
when she married the white man, she would have lost her status for many reasons, including her master's degree.
My grandmother who was from Beauce, as mentioned before,
she was fascinated by Indigenous teachings, and she was born in 1901.
So, early in her life she got along well with Abenakis  and gathered and received a lot of Abenakis teachings
that she passed on to me when I was a young kid because I walk with her and she was my primary caretaker.
So all of those Abenakis teachings was part of me and she is the one  who taught me how
a poison plant comes with a solution, an antidote just beside and in your life
that translates in that you have a problem, then there's a solution just beside of it.
So, there's also her who taught me how to talk with rocks and stones.
And my ancestry is through that and my grandparents and ancestors.
So, that was part of my DNA, that became part of my DNA.
When my parents separated and I met my adoptive mother, I was 11 the first time, and the connection was strong.
It was like love at first sight.
I fell in love with her.
We shared the same connection with the land, with the herd, with the nature, with animals.
And she, I could share safely the teachings of my grandmother with her.
And she validated those teachings, and sometimes she corrected that.
So we went in the woods many times together.
We were harvesting.
The story for my father was we are harvesting today some strawberries and we've prepared pie for him
to then to satisfy his need to know but so many stories, so many teachings she passed on to me at that time.
Unfortunately, she passed when I was seventeen, and that created a big gap in my life, a big, big gap.
I became a mother at the age of twenty, twenty-one and not having the loving,
the love of my adoptive mother and the support was like "who do I belong to?", I lost a sense of belonging there.
So, I focused my attention to make a great living for my sons.
I had two sons.
I was a single mother, and I had the pressure to succeed for them to make a better living for them
and to get rid of the stigma of being a single mother trying to make a career at the same time.
When I joined the public service 15 years ago, after being in law practice for a while,
I was very, very attracted by the Indigenous issues and the reconciliation and services and that need for connection.
But I was so afraid of rejection, of being told that I don't belong there and that then it was like
I was working around the issue until I became, I felt that I was afraid of being called an imposter.
Then I became a grandmother, my granddaughter arrived.
And then the call for me was, oh, my God, I do have to affirm who I am, to pass it on to my granddaughter.
I'm in touch with my grandmother.
I have my granddaughter on the other end, and the sense of seven generations,
that its nurture and value in Indigenous communities became real,
very real for me everyday, on a daily basis, I touch five generations.
So, seven generations is not that long time.
So, this need, inner need to embrace that, in conjunction with having all these initiatives
for Indigenous employees, put in place and promoted within the public service,
allowed me to connect with some elders and to be more in touch with other groups and employees
who face the same situation and same life journey of reappropriation.
So, having that puts me like, okay, I can nurture, I can progress, and I feel like I could finally be myself.
Add all the aspects of who I am, the vowels and consonants together to have a full speech of who I am.
I'm not half bilingual, even if English is not my strongest language.
It's not like 50% English, 50% French.
I speak both languages.
It's the same thing.
I'm Indigenous.
I'm also French Canadian, and I want to embrace all that reality together, in my daily life, and professional and personal.
So today, the big gift in my life, that I've been given through my reconciliation journey
is having my natural mother, who is 85 years old now, helping her claim back the Indian card and the Indian status,
even if it's an archaism of the patriarchal policy, claiming the same status of her family
and walking her path to the sacred teachings that we have this discussion about that,
sacred teachings and all the Indigenous teachings to help her heal her own journey and wounds from that past history.
So all of this to say, I'm more than grateful and chi miigwetch, chi miigwetch.
Thank you, merci.